Reproducible Data Science/Command Line Intro.md, before:

# Working With The Command Line

You are probably used to interacting with your computer with **Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs)**. GUIs can make understanding and using software easy and intuitive, but come with some limitations too. Another way to interact with your computer is through the **Command Line Interface (CLI)**. CLIs allow you to interact with your computer directly through code. This feature has important implications for reproducibility and scientific research. Working with CLIs will enable you to work with big data, replicate code pipelines easily, and collaborate with other researchers efficiently.

## Instructions for Windows

Before we start with using the command line, Windows users will need to go through a couple of extra installation steps. macOS and Linux users can skip this section. Windows native command line, [Command Prompt](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/windows-commands) has some unique syntax and may not work with everything we'll do in this course. Instead, we recommend installing [Git Bash](https://gitforwindows.org/). There are other options for Windows command line as well, but we recommend starting with Git Bash to make sure you have all of the git tools we'll need when we introduce GitHub. The steps for installation are:

1. Navigate to the [git for windows webpage](https://gitforwindows.org/), and click the "Download" buttom.

![Download Git for Windows](https://github.com/Akesari12/Computational-Social-Science-Labs/blob/master/images/Install_Git_for_Windows.png?raw=true)

2. Run the Git installer. For the most part, keep the defaults that the installer recommends. Importantly, you should make sure to keep the recommended settings for adding git to your PATH,  and keeping the default behavior of git pull. The installer may ask if you want to install some beta features as well, we recommend not doing so as this could introduce some bugs.

![Click Next Through the Installer Options](https://github.com/Akesari12/Computational-Social-Science-Labs/blob/master/images/Git%20Installer.png?raw=true)

![Make sure Git is in your PATH](https://github.com/Akesari12/Computational-Social-Science-Labs/blob/master/images/Git%20in%20PATH.png?raw=true)

![Keep the default "git pull" option](https://github.com/Akesari12/Computational-Social-Science-Labs/blob/master/images/Default%20git%20pull.png?raw=true)

![Uncheck the Experimental Features](https://github.com/Akesari12/Computational-Social-Science-Labs/blob/master/images/Beta%20features.png?raw=true)

## Basic Command Line Prompts

Now we're ready to start working with the command line! See the table below for some common commands. 

| Command | Description        | Example |
|---------|--------------------|---------|
| exit    | close the terminal | exit    | 
| cd      | change directory   | cd data | 
| pwd     | present working directory | pwd |
| ls      | list files in directory | ls |
| cp      | copy file          | cp ../data/test.txt ../images/test.txt|
| mv      | move file          | mv ../data/test.txt ../images/test.txt|
| mkdir   | make a new directory | mkdir newdir |
| rm      | delete a file      | rm test.txt |
| rm -r   | delete a directory | rm -r newdir |

Try doing the following:

1. Change your working directory to the "Reproducible Data Science" folder in this repository

2. Make a new directory called "newdir"

3. Copy "test.txt" from Reproducible Data Science to newdir

4. Delete test.txt from Reproducible Data Science

## Using the VIM editor

Navigate to newdir and find test.txt. Next try the following command:

	vim test.txt

Try following the instructions in the text file to add your name to the beginning of the file. Vim is a lightweight text editor that will allow you to create and edit basic text files. While you might mostly use applications like Notepad, [Sublime](https://www.sublimetext.com/), or [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/), vim can still be useful for making small edits and working with files on a server. 

## Working with a Remote Server

Working with big data usually means that need to access resources beyond those available on our own laptops. To do this, we can login to a remote server with much more space and computing power:

	ssh ...

Note: fill this in once we figure out how we're going to do cloud computing.

## Challenge Question

Accomplish the following tasks using only Bash commands:

1. Create a folder named challenge inside of your "newdir" directory

2. cd into this directory

3. Inside of the challenge directory, create a file named movies.txt

4. Add your favorite movie to this file

5. Copy this file to your Desktop

6. Delete the file from your challenge folder

7. Show the contents of movies.txt on your screen

8. Open movies.txt

BONUS: what happens if you try to delete the challenge folder while there is still a file inside of it?

Commit message:

updated bashgit to include running a Python file from command line

Reproducible Data Science/Command Line Intro.md, after:

# Working With The Command Line

You are probably used to interacting with your computer with **Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs)**. GUIs can make understanding and using software easy and intuitive, but come with some limitations too. Another way to interact with your computer is through the **Command Line Interface (CLI)**. CLIs allow you to interact with your computer directly through code. This feature has important implications for reproducibility and scientific research. Working with CLIs will enable you to work with big data, replicate code pipelines easily, and collaborate with other researchers efficiently.

## Instructions for Windows

Before we start with using the command line, Windows users will need to go through a couple of extra installation steps. macOS and Linux users can skip this section. Windows native command line, [Command Prompt](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/administration/windows-commands/windows-commands) has some unique syntax and may not work with everything we'll do in this course. Instead, we recommend installing [Git Bash](https://gitforwindows.org/). There are other options for Windows command line as well, but we recommend starting with Git Bash to make sure you have all of the git tools we'll need when we introduce GitHub. The steps for installation are:

1. Navigate to the [git for windows webpage](https://gitforwindows.org/), and click the "Download" buttom.

![Download Git for Windows](https://github.com/Akesari12/Computational-Social-Science-Labs/blob/master/images/Install_Git_for_Windows.png?raw=true)

2. Run the Git installer. For the most part, keep the defaults that the installer recommends. Importantly, you should make sure to keep the recommended settings for adding git to your PATH,  and keeping the default behavior of git pull. The installer may ask if you want to install some beta features as well, we recommend not doing so as this could introduce some bugs.

![Click Next Through the Installer Options](https://github.com/Akesari12/Computational-Social-Science-Labs/blob/master/images/Git%20Installer.png?raw=true)

![Make sure Git is in your PATH](https://github.com/Akesari12/Computational-Social-Science-Labs/blob/master/images/Git%20in%20PATH.png?raw=true)

![Keep the default "git pull" option](https://github.com/Akesari12/Computational-Social-Science-Labs/blob/master/images/Default%20git%20pull.png?raw=true)

![Uncheck the Experimental Features](https://github.com/Akesari12/Computational-Social-Science-Labs/blob/master/images/Beta%20features.png?raw=true)

## Basic Command Line Prompts

Now we're ready to start working with the command line! See the table below for some common commands. 

| Command | Description        | Example |
|---------|--------------------|---------|
| exit    | close the terminal | exit    | 
| cd      | change directory   | cd data | 
| pwd     | present working directory | pwd |
| ls      | list files in directory | ls |
| cp      | copy file          | cp ../data/test.txt ../images/test.txt|
| mv      | move file          | mv ../data/test.txt ../images/test.txt|
| mkdir   | make a new directory | mkdir newdir |
| rm      | delete a file      | rm test.txt |
| rm -r   | delete a directory | rm -r newdir |

Try doing the following:

1. Change your working directory to the "Reproducible Data Science" folder in this repository

2. Make a new directory called "newdir"

3. Copy "test.txt" from Reproducible Data Science to newdir

4. Delete test.txt from Reproducible Data Science

## Using the VIM editor

Navigate to newdir and find test.txt. Next try the following command:

	vim test.txt

Try following the instructions in the text file to add your name to the beginning of the file. Vim is a lightweight text editor that will allow you to create and edit basic text files. While you might mostly use applications like Notepad, [Sublime](https://www.sublimetext.com/), or [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/), vim can still be useful for making small edits and working with files on a server. 

## Running a Python Script

The last thing we will cover is using the terminal to run Python code. We won't have you regularly do this for this course, but it is useful to know this is an option if you ever are working with a remote server. This is a fairly common situation when you are working with sensitive data (i.e. medical records) or big data.

First, use `touch` to create a file called "hello.py".


	touch hello.py

Now check the files in your current working directory to see if it's there. If so, use vim to add the following text:

	#!/usr/bin/env python3

	print('Hello World!')

Exit the vim editor, and then in the command line, run the following:

	python3 hello.py

or if that doesn't work, try:

	python hello.py

What happens when you run this? Ideally, it should have printed "Hello World!" to the console! As you progress with your coding skills, your projects may require you to run complicated Python scripts for long periods of time. Being able to run them on remote servers, or chain together many different scripts together will be a key skill in helping you manage that workflow.

## Challenge Question

Accomplish the following tasks using only Bash commands:

1. Create a folder named challenge inside of your "newdir" directory

2. cd into this directory

3. Inside of the challenge directory, create a file named movies.txt

4. Add your favorite movie to this file

5. Copy this file to your Desktop

6. Delete the file from your challenge folder

7. Show the contents of movies.txt on your screen

8. Open movies.txt

BONUS: what happens if you try to delete the challenge folder while there is still a file inside of it?
